And I'm just going to say at the top of the tape that I'm Marcia Marnie and I'm with Margaret
Prosser and I can't see the name of your farm.
What's the name of the farm?
Croynant.
C-R-Y-N-A-N-G.
Croynant Farm and it's Rudry.
Rudry?
Yes.
Near Cuffilly.
I thought we were near Cuffilly.
Yes.
And it is Friday, September the 6th, 2019.
So I'm just going to pop that down there.
When we were coming over the hill I could see, I thought, are we near Cuffilly?
I couldn't believe it.
I didn't think we were that close.
Yes, you came up this road here.
Yes.
So you're looking across there.
It's a different perspective because it's gorgeous looking across the levels there,
isn't it?
Yes, yes it is.
Yes, yes, yes.
And then when you get on the top there you can see Clevedon Pier.
Really?
That's amazing.
I might have to come back when it's a clearer day.
Yes, that's right.
It's not so clear today.
I suppose we've had a rain this morning and that makes it more limited, won't you?
Have you met Marjorie Neale?
Yes, I've met Marjorie.
Yes, yes.
Are you related to her?
No, no, we're great friends.
Oh really?
We're from a young farmer's days.
Oh crikey.
Yes, yes, yes.
Oh, yeah, everyone's, it's so lovely.
Everyone, I have to say Margaret, everyone I've met have been just adorable and so open
and welcoming.
It's just so lovely.
Yes.
It's not so much easier.
Because Marjorie was born there on the moors.
Yeah.
She was born there.
Would you know Steph Davis?
Oh, what's her maiden name?
I can't think of her maiden name now.
She was born at Lower Newton House, I think.
Stephanie.
I can't think of her name now.
I'll think of it.
But I wonder if we can just start off, if you could just tell us when you were born
and where you were born.
I was born at 31 Herbert Avenue, Riska.
As I say, my mother was a farmer's daughter and my father worked in the steelworks, you
know.
And we moved from there then to Park Places, Riska.
And we lived there for quite a few years.
And then we moved from there then and took the farm at Langhorst.
And that was 19...
Oh dear, 1946, 47.
That's right.
And then I moved back down then to Sluson in 1956 when I married Dewan.
So what was your father's name?
William Benjamin Thomas.
And your mother?
Minnie Harris.
Oh, that's nice.
Minnie.
So your father worked in the steelworks?
Yes, yes.
Where?
In Pontymester Steelworks, which is not there at the moment.
That was taken down some years ago.
Was that in Newport?
Riska.
Pontymester Riska.
So he wasn't a farmer at all?
No, no, no.
And then he had his sister, Evelyn Mary Thomas.
And she was 44 years in Riska at a radio in a natural gas shop.
And then his other sister, Auntie Phyllis, Phyllis Thomas, she was a teacher.
And up in Abercarne.
And they lived in...
Oh, I've got to think of the name of the place now.
Oh dear, that's terrible.
They lived in Woodland Drive in Rogerstone.
I don't know whether you know that area, do you?
No, I don't.
Do you know Riska at all?
Not very well at all, though.
You don't?
No, no, you go up through Woodland Drive, Rogerstone, up to Riska.
And then of course you carry on up the valley then.
So your mother was from a farming background?
Yes, yes.
And where was she from?
Newhouse Farm, Pontyg, near Pontypool.
Okay.
Well Newin it was, really.
So how did she meet your father?
Well I think my grandparents on my mother's side, father's side, lived in Newin.
And I think my dad used to go back and forth, you know, to see them.
And that's how they met, I suppose.
It's funny how people do meet, don't they?
So your father had to learn how to be a farmer then, seemingly.
Yes, he was always interested.
His cousin used to keep the Mardie Farm, Corkoonoo, just below the Corkoonoo Golf Course.
Yes.
And he spent a lot of time there.
So that's, you know, he really got fed up with the, as the saying is, the stewardess.
So he thought they'd branch out and they had this farming land course then.
And we took that over Lock, Stock and Barrel.
When they say Lock, Stock and Barrel, we took over the stock and rented the farm there.
Okay.
Yes.
Land course.
And I liked land course very much.
We'd look out for the door and we could see the Pentagon.
Oh, he had?
Yes.
And 1947 was a winter.
Oh, terrible.
Was it really?
Oh, shocking, yes.
I mean we had tremendous snow.
The milk didn't go from there with the lorry for over a week.
Wow.
Because we were snowed up.
Yeah.
And then there was a camp of Italians at Bulk.
And there was another, the Germans in, Italian, German soldiers in Brecon.
And they cut through really.
Yes.
Amazing.
Yes, it was, it was horrendous.
So, and then I used to go to school in Brecon then from Land Gorse.
Walk up to the hill.
I used to hate school.
I'd rather be home.
Doing the work there.
And I used to, I was a cyclist sometimes, but I'd walk at the times and I used to really
dode-lune out.
And then I'd hear the train coming around from Talga to Brecon and stop at the Land
Gorse Halt.
And I'd try to, but no, I never got there.
Then I came home.
And then my father said, look, you cannot do this, you see.
You must, you have got to go to school.
And I said, well, I don't like school.
So I left when I was 15.
So that was my story of schooling in Brecon.
How old were you when your family moved down here?
When I say here, over there?
Oh, to Berry Hill.
So where is Berry Hill?
It's on the main road.
Go through Castleton.
Yeah.
To Newport.
And before you get down to where there's a big walk over a bridge.
Yes.
Well, it's on the right-hand side.
Oh, really?
Before you get there.
Yes.
It's not there now.
Is it gone?
Is it all gone?
No, the farm is still there.
Pick your own.
But they haven't done that for some time now.
And there's a bungalow that's built next to it, which the person that took over after
my mother and father finished, he was there for some time.
Well, actually, who was there was Robert Peel.
You know, Robert Peel, this is his grandson, but his name is Robert.
Really?
Yes.
Amazing.
So why did your parents move from Langorce?
Why did they come here?
Well, because, well, it was a bit bigger farm, and we liked this area more because my parents,
well, my father, particularly, moved from this area.
And as I say, his cousin used to farm the farm down below, so there's quite a lot of,
you know, over there with them.
And then, so did your parents move to Slough's Farm, or was that you?
No, I moved to Slough's Farm.
I married from Berryhill, and married Dylwyn from Slough's Farm.
So how did you meet Dylwyn?
Oh, Young Farmers.
It's quite a, it's quite a matamorial place, isn't it?
Yes, Young Farmers, that we used to belong to.
So was it very active then, Young Farmers?
Yes, we were, yes.
St. Maren's Young Farmers, it went under.
But I did belong to the Llynsefad and Young Farmers in Bracken, or Langorce, when I was there.
And, yes, we were quite active, you know.
Yes, we used to have some fun, different, go to different shows and so forth, you know.
But, oh yes, it's quite a matamorial place, the Young Farmers, I think.
Really?
Yes.
I've heard that so many times, people who've met through, it must be an informal marriage bureau.
Crikey.
Oh yes, yes.
So you met Dylwyn, and then he was already living at...
He was born down Slough's.
He was born there.
Yes, yes.
And he's got two sisters.
One is Betty, which is two years younger, older.
And she's living in Gloucester.
She's 19 now.
And then the other sister lived at...
Did you see who met Derek?
Yes.
Well, Derek's mother was his sister to Dylwyn.
Oh, okay.
Doreen.
Yes.
She died...
Oh, she wasn't very old.
She was quite good cancer bad.
Oh.
And very sad it was.
Yes.
And that's why Derek...
So how have we met?
How did you come to meet Derek, excuse me, ask it?
Well, Derek and Andrew were both through John Souther, who worked for the drainage board.
Ah, right.
Yes.
Yes, he's a chap that goes round cleaning them and talking to all the landowners and
stuff.
So John introduced me to...
He said, you've got to speak to Derek and Andrew Prosser.
Oh.
So that...
And then that's why I'm here now.
Yes.
Very grateful to him.
Well, my father Prosser, he was on the drainage board, and he was supposed to lend us different
meetings and that, you know.
So that's, um, Dew Wynne's father.
It's her.
So what was his full name?
Wynneford.
Wynneford Prosser.
So what...
And his wife was living at Lansoy.
And I don't know what they met.
Um, let me see, I think, I think Dew Wynne's father had a housekeeper.
And then, um, my mother-in-law Marjorie, she was Marjorie, she came down to meet her.
And then they seemed to get friendly and then they married, you see.
Yes, Lansoy.
Lansoy at the side desk.
So what was, um, sorry, what was his name?
Wynneford.
So he was on the drainage board, you see.
Yes, yes.
And Dew Wynne was on the drainage board.
Yes.
So I'm getting confused.
So Wynneford is Dew Wynne's father.
That's right.
So Wynneford was on the drainage board.
So what can you tell me about Dew Wynne's parents on the farm?
Well, Dew Wynne's dad, Wynneford, has got a brother, I'll show you photographs of
them afterwards.
Campbell Prosser, he was a barrister-in-law.
And he was out abroad for a long time, Singapore.
Really?
And then he had a sister, which I've got the photograph, the whole family's up there,
you can see later on.
And then he had a sister that lived in Cardiff Road.
And then, you see Campbell.
And then there was Dew Wynne who was killed in the war, first World War.
And that was Wynneford.
Well, I'll have to, I can show you the photograph.
It's on the wall, so it's easy for you to have a look at it on the wall, really.
So that was, that was Dew Wynne's father's side, you see.
And they had butcher shops in Cardiff, Clifton Street.
Yes.
There was a big butchery in there.
And that was their business, more or less, you know.
So, butchery shop.
Yes.
Butcher shop.
So when did the farm come into the...
Well, Wynneford, he wasn't keen on the butchery shop, so he went farming then.
So he took over, took sluice and rented sluice.
Oh, right.
And then, of course, the milk.
And then they used to have a milk round with a milk van and everything.
And Dew Wynne used to go occasionally when his father had a meeting up in London, but
he wasn't so keen on the milk round.
But he used to do it when his father had to go to London for meetings with the drainage
port and that, you know.
So why did they have meetings in London?
I don't know, really.
And of course they used to have the meetings out at Magad, didn't they?
Yeah.
That's the place.
Is it Magad?
Yes, Magad, isn't it?
They used to have the...
Oh, Nash.
Nash, rather.
That's right.
Pie Corner.
That's right, Pie Corner.
Yeah.
Yes, Nash.
Yes, yeah.
So...
So was it always a dairy farm then, the sluice farm?
Yes, yes.
Yes, they had cows and everything.
And sheep.
And then we moved up here later.
And then they moved there, but then they went out to the cows.
And so the Andros only got the sheep at the moment.
So then you met Dilwyn.
Three young farmers.
And so where did you marry, actually?
In Coorkean O'Church.
Oh, did you?
It's a dear little church, yes.
Yeah.
It's a house now that's been turned into...
Yes, Coorkean...
Do you know...
Well, you know the main one I said about with this article is you're turned down for Coorkean
O'Church for the golf course.
Yes.
And it's just before you get to the golf course.
Or just after the golf course, sorry.
On the right.
On the left-hand side you've got a little lane up to the church.
Really?
Oh, I don't think I've been to the church.
Oh, I don't think...
It's a house now.
It's...
Was it a chapel then?
Or was it a chapel?
No, a church.
Really?
Yeah, Coorkean O'Church.
Oh, I have to go back that way afterwards.
I might go and have a look.
Yes, yes, yes.
I had no idea.
And I think there's three or four houses there.
Because there was a farm next to it but they've gone into homesteads, you see.
So then, so did you then start your married life at Soos Farm?
Yes.
You moved in with your in-laws?
No, no, they moved, they built a house.
Do you see the house on the side there?
Yes.
They built that.
And then we went into the farmhouse and they built that and went into there.
So this would have been, what, the mid-50s?
Yes, 57.
57?
Yes.
So, erm, so what was the farm doing then?
Was it...
Er, milk.
Milk.
Milk and milk round.
Yeah.
Yeah, and they'd fill the bottles, you know, and wash the bottles in and in the little
shed that was there.
Yeah.
That's erm...
Yes, I think I've got a photograph here.
Excuse me.
How many cows did you have, Margaret?
How many cows did you have?
Er, well not like they've got today, they've got hundreds today, haven't they?
Yeah.
But they've really been 125.
But that's still...
Which is quite, you know, big for those days, I suppose, wasn't it?
Yeah.
Nice to get a photograph here, I think, aren't they?
And that wasn't all hand-milked, was it?
Was that all milked by hand?
Well, it was years ago and then they went in with the machines then, you know.
This is a photograph of Slough's house.
This was before 1963.
That's where it was when I used to live there, you see.
Oh, crikey.
There was a milk van right there.
Yeah.
A dairy there where they used to wash the bottles.
Cows used to go into there.
Yeah.
And then this was the garden.
I mean, Anne's got a beautiful garden down there now.
Wow.
And then there was just a shed where we kept chickens.
Yes.
Erm, so it all altered, of course, because all this is buildings, you know.
This has all changed, hasn't it?
Yeah, all definitely.
I mean, it's all built up.
Yes.
Very rural then.
Yes, yes, yes.
It was.
Crikey.
And then in this wheelchair, which was his own, that's where they built the house.
You can see Wyvern.
Oh.
You know, they built that there.
Did they build that because Dilwyn was getting married?
Yes, yes.
They built that to go in there.
And erm, oh, but I was only thinking the other day.
I think it was about 90.
Oh, I've forgotten the money.
I'm not sure I was thinking about how much it cost the other day.
The bridge cost me more to get across the reed to get to the house than the house, I think.
Really?
Yes, it was.
You forget about that, don't you?
Yes, you do.
You have to get across the reed.
That's true.
Yes, yes.
So what were your first impressions when you moved down there and started married life?
Erm, well, I used to go back and forth there before we were actually married, you know,
and have supper and things with Mother-in-law and that.
And erm, yes, well I liked it very much because we had ground with Berry Hill.
We had two fields on the moors, as we call them.
Okay, yes.
We rented those and erm, so it wasn't any different for me really, you know.
Yeah.
And then of course we used to go to Young Farmers there.
We used to go to Young Farmers Club in St Melons.
Did you?
Yes, yes.
In the chapel there, I used to hold the Young Farmers meetings.
Yeah.
But erm, oh yes.
So I enjoyed life.
So you were a farmer's wife.
So I've spoken to lots of farmers and erm, so as a farmer's wife, would you, would you
have been aware of and concerned with all the reams and the maintenance and stuff?
I mean, I guess what I'm trying to ask is, was there very much a clear, this was what
the woman did and this is what the men did, or was it all mixed up?
Well I think, I used to enjoy going out and feeding calves and things and that, you know.
And then when I was born, we used to put him in the plan, put him in the corner of the
milking shed and he'd be sat there, you know, watching the cows coming in and out and all
that.
And before we had a parlour that was, the milking parlour type of thing, you know, where
you could get up and in and mushing.
But erm, yeah, I've always been, I've always been interested outside.
Because I used to spend quite a bit of time before we went to Langhorst with my grandparents
at Newhouse Farm, Pantague.
Yeah.
You know, just go out there and stay when I was a little tot, you know.
Put me on the bus and you put my aunt with me, me and you in.
How lovely.
Yeah.
So did you ever get involved in the bottling of milk down there?
I used to have sometimes, and that helped, erm, my father probably used to, you know,
mostly he'd do that.
I'd have to come back off the road.
And then wash the bottles and get them ready then to fill up the next morning.
You know, it's, erm, yeah.
Oh yes.
Oh yes, I've had a very enjoyable life really.
You can tell that, it shows in your face.
It's lovely.
Yeah, it does.
What about the poultry?
Was that an important part of the family?
Yeah, we used to sell eggs on the milk farm quite a lot, you know.
And then if there was any surplus eggs then, I used to bring them to the husband brothers
who used to have, erm, well, I don't know, what do you call it, an egg centre that they
would have eggs and then they'd take them out on different rounds.
Where were the husband brothers based?
It's, erm, Lisbon.
Oh really?
Yes, yes.
But that's all different now altogether.
You know, places change, don't they?
Yeah.
Well it's interesting, look at the new photograph, because you must have seen enormous change
in your lifetime down there.
Oh yes, yeah, especially now, more buildings up for stock and everything, you know.
Yeah.
And, erm, I mean I used to try and keep it well clean, tidy and all this business.
And we used to have a boy living in then, you see.
Did you?
Yes, yes, you know the, erm, excuse me, you know the kitchen.
You're going for the back door, don't you?
Well that's the dining room, the kitchen for every day.
Yeah.
Then there's the kitchen, isn't there?
Then there's the other room.
We used to have a boy living in there.
Did you?
Yes, yeah, and he had his bed in there and there was a stove in the corner.
We used to have for the fire and he had an armchair.
Yeah.
He always ate with us.
And, erm, yes, so we always had a boy living in.
And who was he?
Was it a series of people or?
Erm, well yes, different, we had a few from St. Brides that didn't live in, they came
back and forth, which is, you know, from Cocoonia.
But a couple of, they actually lived in there, you know, with us and they'd eat with us and
all this business, you know.
But, erm, I mean he had a television, well not a television, a wireless one, but he did
have a television towards the end.
And, erm, yes, we always had a boy living in.
I suppose the farm could support that, whereas it would be difficult to do that today, wouldn't
it?
Well I suppose, yes, it's different, it's the different ideas today, isn't it?
Yeah.
Different world today, really.
It's a strange lot to really be farming, isn't it?
But did you have sheep then?
Yes, we had some sheep, yeah, pet lambs and something, you know, feed those and, yes,
I can't remember how many sheep, we didn't have so many sheep as well, no, naturally,
because we had the dairying as well, you see.
It's, erm, yes, oh yes, I've enjoyed my life up until now.
So Antem used to go up onto the seawall and bring the sheep in on ponies.
Yes.
Did you ever get involved with that?
No, not really, no, no.
Yes, we'd put sheep over on the seawall and then, erm, Doreen, Derek's father, Philip,
would come over and he'd have this horse and a little trap thing, you know, and they'd
sit in there and then they'd go up then to get onto the horse and to bring the sheep
up and all this business, you know.
And then one day, erm, I don't know what happened, but anyhow, the pony started kicking
the bottom of the possum and of course got out of the, out of the showers and left these
four or five of them and the possum went backwards while it was suffering.
What, backwards down the slope?
Well, it went back, it went back, back, you know.
Oh, I see, because the horse had gone.
There were the showers hanging over them.
Were they OK?
Well, they were all right and the dog jumped out a bit quick and the dog was in as well.
Oh, OK, yeah, they used to come over every Sunday and go down and see the sheep and all
sorts of those, I don't know, pretty much.
Because the sheep used to graze on the other side of it.
Yes, yes, hmm, hmm.
So.
Until, like, erm, the tide used to come in so far, you know.
Yeah.
But they hired the, erm, I think they hired the bank then.
Erm, yes, they did hire it because of course the sea, the water was coming, the sea was
getting in higher, wasn't it, you know.
Because you're very close to the seawall there, aren't you?
Oh, yes, it's only the field really, isn't it?
Yes.
The field across.
Did you ever experience the water coming over?
You see it sometimes if it was very rough, just splashing up a bit, you know.
But, erm, you know, I never had the thought in mind of thinking, oh gosh, I hope it doesn't
come over there.
I never thought of that.
No.
Which I suppose it does.
It has, well, it has in some places over the years, hasn't it, you see.
Do you ever use the shore where the sheet grates?
Is there like a picnic spot when you had children when they were little?
Yeah, we used to go over there and, erm, like, a lot of the, have you been over there?
You've been over there, of course.
Hmm.
I haven't been over there for years really, so I don't know what it's like.
But we used to have little, little, what's the name of the water coming in?
Where there's been bits and digits.
Yeah, like rivulets.
Yes, yes, yes.
Hmm.
Yeah, yes, we used to go over there with our neighbours.
Edinsons Neckardt Farm, Slough's Farm that would be.
The one just on the side of the road.
And, yes, we'd go over there for picnics and, er, yeah, we used to have a, you know, now
and again have a good time.
Was it, was it, erm, er, was there a real sense of community there then?
Er, down the village, yeah, erm, even the village itself.
Yeah.
Oh yes, because those, those opposite the hall, those are all built, you see, erm, because
when I went down there first there was no houses there then, you know, so they'd been
built and at the back of the hall is a little cul-de-sac.
Yeah.
That's the council houses further over.
They were, they were there when I went down.
Hmm.
And different houses had been built around there, you know.
Yes, oh it's nice to live, I've been, I'm quite upset really because WI had been a
member for 62 years down there.
Have you?
Yes.
And, er, I used to take my mother-in-law because she didn't drive, Deryn's mother
didn't drive.
So, and then after lunch we'd go down on the, er, the second Tuesday of the month, I used
to pick her up and we'd go down, because she was president at that time, and there was
the back, the old black stove, I don't know if you've seen the old black stove, it was
like that.
In the village hall?
In the village hall.
And then put the chairs and tables up, and then go back then and I'd pick her up then
at the tea then to go to WI.
And, er, yes we did that for years.
Erm, and then I used to have the milk van then, I had the milk van for a couple of,
oh for about a week or more in the afternoons, to go to, er, a place in Bremne to get a
sanding machine.
And, er, put in the back there and come, and then redo the floor, you know, sand, get the
floor all nice and, well, slim you know.
Yeah?
Oh, we've had some good times down there.
Really good times.
So somebody was telling me that St. Price WI used to have a canning machine.
Yes.
Do you know about that?
Yes, yes, and Mother Prosser had it.
Now where it is I don't know.
Yes, because we used to put fruit into our own canning.
Yes.
Hmm, hmm.
I wonder where it is, er, now I, I've forgotten about that.
I wonder where that is now.
Yeah, now I wonder where that is.
You've got me thinking now.
Ha ha ha.
I'll be trying to explore where it is.
So would they, would the WI rent it out, or would they take it out to people and say,
do the canning for people?
Er, I couldn't, I wouldn't, I can't say that.
I mean, erm, I know we used to borrow it and do our own.
At least Mother Prosser did more than I did, but I'd give a hand, you know.
But erm, that's interesting how you brought up that canning machine.
I'm not going to bother you now.
I'd be worried about that.
Ha ha ha.
It'd be lovely if it's still around somewhere.
Yes.
Yes, it would, wouldn't it?
And it's still going, the St. Brides WI?
St. Brides, no, no, it's folded up a long time ago.
Oh really?
Yes, yes, yes.
Oh, that's a shame.
So a lot of the people from there now come to Peterstone, and this is why I'm rather
upset that Peterstone is talking about folding up.
Oh.
I mean, the secretary, she's moving away down to Swansea, well that's why I'm there.
The president, she did say that she'd do it for another two years.
Well, the two years has come up now, and no one else wants to take the responsibility.
That's such a shame.
It is a shame.
And it's been going how long?
Well, I've been down there 62 years.
That's phenomenal, Margaret.
And it was on a long time before that.
Oh.
Yes, it's sad really.
How many members have you got down there?
There's, from St. Brides area, around Asda, where people live, I expect there's 14 people
come from that area.
And it seems such a shame that, you know, no one will take it on.
After all that time?
Yeah, it is.
Because I was president for about seven years after Mother Pross has given it up, I don't
know how long she was.
But no, it's quite sad.
I was quite upset about it really.
But I'm hoping that I might join Kevin Madley, Michael Stoneman, which is nearer.
Yeah.
But the distance didn't make any difference to me.
It's a longevity though, isn't it?
Winds and weathers.
Yeah.
Pick up a couple of ladies from Ashfield on the way down.
Oh, how sweet.
Yes, you just enjoy it.
That's how it goes, isn't it?
So you said Mother Pross used to can fruit.
Yes.
Where did her fruit come from?
Oh, well, she had, we had plum trees.
You know, we had trees, we had plum trees and we had a couple of trees around here.
Yeah.
Plum trees and things.
And well, that was our garden then.
Yeah.
You know, and then we'd have beans and stuff like that, you know, to roast it.
But yeah, I've forgotten about that canning machine.
So what was the process then?
So you'd pick the fruit and then wash it?
Yes.
And then make a syrup.
Yeah.
And then put it in the tins.
And then with the machine you'd seal it all.
And that would be a tinned fruit.
Gosh, and that would last all the winter?
Well, yes, if you know, you make as much as you can, you know, or we could.
And yes, gosh, I'm glad you thought about the canning machine.
You've got me worried now.
Well, it's come up a few times, you see.
So I thought, I'm curious.
Yes.
I've never heard of a canning machine before.
And that St. Bride's WI has a canning machine.
It just sounds really resourceful to me.
Yes, that's right.
Yes, yes.
I wonder where that is now.
Did the WI, because in the past the WI has been absolutely fantastic at recording local people and their memories,
did the St. Bride's WI ever do anything like that?
No, they folded up, as I said, and a couple of them came from there then, which are a few more now,
because the president it is now, she lives in one of the houses by our stairs.
And of course a couple of her friends have come as well.
As I say, I was quite upset last week when I knew it was going to fold up.
Oh, that is upsetting.
Yes, it is.
But there we are, people are not interested.
You can't force people to be.
You can't.
You can try and encourage.
So as a young woman, a young wife, was it part of one's social life, the WI?
It was, really.
Yes, I went up to London for the two AGMs.
The WI was something that you did as a young wife, and you have continued to do for a long time.
Yes, yes, yes.
Yes, I enjoyed WI.
I went to London to the AGM on two occasions, which is up at the Albert Hall,
and that was very interesting, where they come from all over the country.
It has gone back a bit.
But you know, what struck me about down on the moors there,
that it's quite a different landscape, isn't it?
It's flat, all the water courses.
Oh, yes, yes.
Was that a challenge in some way?
I don't know whether you were a friend, because there's people living in the church now,
the church was, and on about, what, what am I, five foot, am I five foot or nothing?
Except about, well, I should know the possible, where the Greek flood was.
Yes, yes.
Yes, and the bank, you can see the bank, now we're one of the fields of one of the farms up,
as you go down the road a bit.
Yes.
Yes, well, I think I'm right in saying, the water more or less came up nearly up to Cattleden.
Yeah, it was, yeah, because it goes down, doesn't it, apparently?
Yeah, yeah, it's very low, very low.
Did you ever experience flooding there?
No, no, the rains would fill up quite a bit, you know, but no, no,
we never had any flooding as such, no.
What was it like having young children around those things, though, was it ever a worry?
Oh, yes, yes, now the neighbours on that farm down to, what's the farm then,
they lost a child that drowned in the water.
And also, instant brides, the child drowned in some brides in the rain.
Oh, really?
Yes, yes, but I suppose you get,
I suppose if you're born down there, you get used to it.
I know the one that came down, the one further on down the road,
was from London, came down to see the sister,
came down and brought the little one, of course, went down the steps and down to the rain there,
you know, which is very sad, very sad.
Oh, gosh, that's so sad, isn't it?
Terrible, terrible. Yes, but...
When you first went to Sleuth's Farm, was there electricity and stuff?
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, because when I lived in Langorce, we had no electricity.
No, no.
I got the Aladdin lamp there, the hanging Aladdin lamp,
and I've got a little table lamp that's in there, that's with oil,
and we didn't have any hot water, cold water or anything like that.
Can you talk about the winter of 47? What was the winter of 62, 63 like?
I was down here then, of course.
Oh, here?
Yes, yes, it was bad then.
We used to go up to Castleton with the tractor
to have the lorry to come down, you know, to bring it down.
Really?
And then in the evenings, a couple of the locals there, the youngsters,
they'd take me down the six-pouse on a big boat, drag it down the road, you know.
Oh, yes, we had quite a lot of snow. Yes, yes, yes, but we had more when we were in Langorce.
I remember seeing on Penavan, down one of the crevices in June, there was still snow.
Really? My goodness. I can see that now.
It went on and on and on, didn't it?
Yes, it did, it did.
Did anyone ever go skating on the Reens or anything like that?
On the lake. Oh, sorry, on Langorce Lake they used to go, but I mean,
well, it was frozen over and a motorbike went across, and it's never known before.
Really?
It went across the other side.
I've never heard that before.
I think they did. Yes, I should say, but many did freeze, didn't they?
Yes.
You know, it's just, and yeah, we used to go, we used to go and,
a crowd of us were really into Langorce, we used to take one of these little boats.
We used to go down to the other side of Langorce, Langasty, and I don't know, even with Langorce.
And if you look across there, there's a little hole, about three feet from the end of the river,
and Langorce, and we used to go across there to dances,
and we'd take one of these skiff boats, you know, and we used to row across there.
Did you really?
Yeah.
That's quite some distance.
Yes, it was really, back when you were younger, I noticed distance too.
I wonder now.
And we used to tether it there and walk up these two or three years, go to the dance,
come back, then and row back.
My goodness, imagine if my daughter was doing that, I'd be, you know,
Yeah, or what we used to do.
Or what we used to do.
Yeah, what we used to do then, years ago, when we were young.
Do you remember the, did you ever help with haymaking as a young farmer's wife?
Well, yes, dry the tractor perhaps and that, you know, the baling.
And of course, we had a photograph, I don't know, I might have got a photograph here,
where, excuse me.
What's this prize here then, Margaret?
Well, this is when I was first lady chairman of St. Mannon's show.
Now, that was a big show, someone said to me.
Oh yes, oh it was lovely, oh yes, fair play, it was.
I look forward to St. Mannon's show.
So is it a very strong farming community?
Is it a very close-knit farming community?
Yes, I think so, yes, yes.
You know, we do a lot of things together.
We had two donkeys and this donkey down Slose and then we put her in foal
and oh, you've never seen such sweet things when this little one came.
I think the whole village came down to see it.
Really?
Oh, just the deal thing.
Someone told me that farmers kept donkeys because they were good luck.
Well, yes, they were, a lot of people had donkeys with a cattle.
Hmm, I've never heard that before.
Yes, yes, I don't know whether it's, oh there's the, I spent it this hand,
little one, Tangle.
Wow.
This was in 1955 when I saw my sheep and I bought the little sports car.
Is that you?
Yeah, no, that's not me, that's my mother and my aunt, but that's the little car I bought.
You bought it?
Yes, I saw the sheep and I bought the little car.
Oh, I think that's so impressive.
That must have been very unusual for a young woman there.
Oh, yeah, we used to have some fun, we used to go following the hounds.
Did you?
Yes, on the top there and yeah, and then one day walking back to the car and here comes the local policeman with a steering wheel in his hand.
He took the steering wheel off.
Why?
I went to Blackpool in that and back.
Oh my goodness, you and me, what sort of car is it?
It was built up among the Singer, it was a Singer engine.
I am so impressed with you.
Oh my goodness.
And then you followed the hounds down on the moors?
Yes, yeah.
Really?
Derek was telling me about that.
Yes, yes, the Shrediga Hunt.
Oh, so where would you go?
And the Shrediga Hunt was based in Beyslech, but it's all been built on now.
Yeah?
So they've gone up to Gelligeir, the hounds up there.
Yeah.
So, I mean, we use them if we have dead stock or something.
We pay so much a year for them to pick it up, to take it up to the year, us, them, you know.
But then you would follow them in your car, would you?
Yeah.
And who would you do that with?
On the top of Penelan, I don't know, Penelan.
Yeah.
Up there, we'd be up there.
That's like an orchard there.
Yes, yeah, we used to have trees.
So did you get apples off those as well?
Yes, apples and pears.
Did you ever make cider from them?
No, no, but we used to can them.
Can them?
Gosh, that's lovely.
So where was the orchard then?
This was my...
So where was the orchard here?
There.
Oh, gosh.
Yes.
Okay.
And this was my garden out by here.
Ah.
Did you ever have horses on your farm?
No.
No, just the two donkeys.
Oh, we did...
Oh gosh, that's me when I was...
Oh, I shouldn't be showing you this.
This is 1951.
Oh, please do.
I presented Langhorst in Breckenshire.
Really?
So when it was haymaking, would you have had to make all the lunches for everyone coming
in who was helping with the haymaking?
Yes, usually in the evening I'd cook ham, potatoes and stuff like that.
They'd come in at supper time.
Not so much in the daytime.
I mean, they'd have someone to eat sandwiches or something.
But I used to cook dinner in the evening for them to come in.
Yes, and they'd come back.
Yes, we had a lovely life really.
And that was me.
So did you ever... you were probably then too young to have ever thatched hay ricks then
and stuff?
Well, yes, I've seen them then.
Have you?
Yes.
When I was up, my grandparents, they used to do it there.
But of course we've always had the bands and of course the bales now, but we used to do
small bales.
Yes.
I think there's a certain amount of small bales now, if I remember rightly.
Because it's the round ones now, isn't it?
Yes, of course.
Yes, the big round ones.
Yes, all times have altered.
So was there any... there's something I've been meaning to ask and I've forgotten to ask
everybody else, but was there... excuse me... any food or meals?
So for example, my parents are Irish and a traditional meal we would have would be boiled
ham, parsley sauce and something called chump, which was potatoes and onions and cabbage.
Yes, yes.
Is there anything on the moors that was traditional like that?
Any particular dishes or...?
I used to always boil ham.
Yes.
You know, I liked boiled ham and potatoes and stuff like that.
No, I suppose... I think it's a thing that's a farmhouse meal, isn't it?
Yes.
So, ham, potatoes, peas, parsley sauce, you know, that type of thing, isn't it?
So you would always be in the kitchen providing food for people working on the farm?
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Yes, yes, yes.
Yes, I used to go out and feed the children with chicken in there, feed the poultry and
all that.
But yes, they'd come in then about 10, 11 o'clock and then they'd sit down at the supper and
they'd go about 12 o'clock, 1 o'clock.
Wow.
Yes, yes.
I used to enjoy the hay making.
The harvest time used to be lovely.
Why was it... why did you like it?
Because it was just a...
Well, I think... well, me too.
They used to come in and have a rest and then, you know, we'd go hauling the bales and all
this business, you know, the loose hay years ago.
Yes.
I thought I had a photograph here of... I haven't got one.
I thought I had a photograph here of the...
Oh, what was it?
So do you remember any of the people who used to work for the drainage board that used to
come round and clear the reams and stuff?
Oh dear, what was his name?
I can see him now.
Oh, really?
Oh, they're looking to meet in a moment.
Yes, he was just slashed over the long-handled hook.
Oh, do you remember that?
Down the Broadway.
Yeah.
Down the Broadway particularly.
Oh.
Well, the one that has died now, a couple of months ago.
I can't think of the other gentleman.
I can see him now doing it, you know.
Well, that's silly, isn't it?
It'll come to you.
It'll come.
And so Dilwyn was on the drainage board?
Yeah, Dilwyn was on the drainage board and his father was before him.
Yeah.
So what did that mean?
Did it mean just, you know, was it an important role?
Well, I suppose it controlled the reams and everything really, wasn't it?
The drainage board more or less, you know, to see that they were cut and the reeds were
cut and everything from off the sides.
And I suppose control the gates, it opened out opposite the bottom of the Broadway.
Yes.
The gates, it's all automatic now, you see.
Yeah, all changed.
Years ago it used to have you be done more or less by hands, you know.
So it's the most, very interesting really.
Very interesting, aren't they, in different things?
I think so.
I think it's fascinating actually.
Yes, yes.
It's very different.
What about fish?
Did you ever get eels in the ream?
Oh yes, yes, down the bottom of the sluice, you know.
You used to have eels out of there.
Did you?
Yes, yes.
What, you used to cook them?
Oh yes, I used to live in Eel.
Really?
So how did you catch them and cook them?
Oh, you catch them with a rod and put them on the end of it, you know, catch them like
that.
You'd put them back in there.
Yeah.
So as, you know, they'd have fresh water, so you'd kill them and eat them.
How long would you do it?
I wouldn't, he wouldn't.
Oh no.
But you would keep them in the fresh bucket for a few days, fresh with water?
Oh yes, change of water for a day or two so as they get the, well, the earthy stuff.
Otherwise you'd be eating earth.
So you would do that?
Yeah.
Really?
And then you would skin it?
Yeah.
And then cook it, fry it in the frying pan, chop it up bits.
Really?
But they were very keen.
I mean, I enjoy anything.
Yeah.
Or everything put it that way.
I'm not, plus even my food I enjoy a lot.
That's a good free source of food though.
Yeah, it is, yes.
What about elders?
Was that something anyone ever had down there?
No.
I don't think so.
No, no.
On the bottom end of the drive of the bus, you have them down there.
I need to get them up through the, you know, up the piers you get them in the bus.
Did you?
Pretty.
Yes, yeah.
Crikey.
Oh yes, it's, it's fascinating really, you know, when you think back what you've seen
and done.
What about church?
Did your family ever go to church, you know, when you were down living on?
Yes, I used to go to St. Peter's Church, which is the big church in the village.
Yeah.
But of course that closed.
And it's a house now, person.
Is that something the whole family would go to?
Yes, Sunday morning we used to try and go to church on a Sunday evening.
I mean, Father Prosser was a church warden there.
Was he?
His father.
Yeah.
Oh yes, he was a big churchman.
Was he?
Yes, yes, and Mother used to go, Mother Prosser used to go.
Yeah.
And they were occasionally, and they were married, they were married in Peterstone Church.
But of course it closed then, a little while after.
And it's a house now, people's got it as a house.
They were living in there, I don't know, unfortunately the gentleman died now only last year.
His wife and the child are still there.
But apparently they were, I've never been in there since, naturally, but they were living
in pods.
Were they?
It's a big church, man, it's huge, high, cropped, tremendous height.
Yeah.
Been up the top of the tower, lovely view from there.
Really?
Yeah.
And then?
Well the congregation had been very big.
Well yes, it varied then.
You know, it's like Marsh, Marshfield is a bigger church, or they do get more congregation
there, because I suppose it's in a bigger village, isn't it?
And that's a nice church too, St Mary's Church.
I've got a rose tree down there for doing, but I've also got a casket up in the field
up here.
Have you?
Of his ashes, yes.
Oh.
And...
Do you remember any characters that stand out for you that you remember?
Well, before the buildings that are over the other side of the road now, there were buildings,
but not like they are now.
And there used to be an old fellow living in there.
Yeah.
And Dennis his name was.
And he used to wear a long, long coat.
He lived in there and there was a grate in the corner, where you'd have a bit of a fireplace
if you wanted it.
And Dennis, and he'd walk from there then into town, or Romney, and walk back.
I can see him now, it was in the stages ago.
Yeah.
But he had this long, long black coat.
There was another one down at the farm down at St. Brides, and his name was...
He was another character.
I'm trying to think of his name.
He lived in a barn.
I don't like to use the word tramp, but kind of like just somebody who used to...
Yes, they were kind of a tramp type of person, you know.
Billy Mitch, that was down there.
That's right, and Dennis used to be in this one, in our barn over there.
No trouble, I mean, you know, actually I think Father Prosser went over there one day,
and he died in the Llasnym, so...
Really?
To get the police and all up his back.
Yeah.
But, no, there were characters about then, weren't there?
Years ago, like that.
I can see them, I can place them now.
It's gone back a little while.
Yes, Dennis and Billy Mitch used to call him.
And they reckoned that if the airplanes were coming over during the war,
because that was when he was there during the war,
he'd turn his pipe upside down, in cases.
Oh, isn't that lovely?
It's a compliment when you think it was a thing, because they might see his pipe.
Oh, right.
Oh, Jesus, really funny.
Someone was telling me, now, where was it now?
I can't remember.
Oh, something about that...
Was it St. Brides, or was it somewhere else there?
I might be wrong, but on the Sunday, the pubs used to be closed in Wales.
This is when the border was different,
so people used to flood over to here to use the pubs on the Sunday.
Is that right?
Maybe I've got that wrong.
No, they used to...
There was a law, wasn't there, where the pubs used to close on a Sunday,
a lot of places.
But I can't remember where that was.
I might have got that wrong, actually.
I feel very sad, really, the six bars was closed.
Yeah.
There were two cottages at the side of that.
Was it a popular pub?
Oh, yes.
We've had a lot of lovely times down there, especially Christmas time.
We'd go down there, and somebody would be playing the organ,
and we'd have a good old sing-song and that.
Yeah.
Oh, I think I've got a photograph.
I'm boring you with these photographs.
You are not. I love photographs, Margaret.
I really do love photographs.
This is the six bars with all the horses.
No, that's interesting.
I think I might have seen that photograph before.
Have you, maybe?
Erm, no, I think...
He was no master.
So what hunt, which pack is this?
This would be the...
What's it?
Trudiga.
Trudiga?
Trudiga hunt, yes.
And this is the one you used to follow in your sports car?
Yes, that's right, yes.
Oh, and who's this?
Do you know where this is taken?
No, I'm not certain of that.
That's...
And you see there's two cottages at the side of the six bars.
Oh, yes, yes.
And this is...
What was this? Cairnfip?
Oh, I don't know, last year?
Because it looks like it's been closed for years, doesn't it?
Yes, it does, yes.
It looks a bit messed up.
Yes, it's a shame because we've had a lot of fun down there.
Yeah.
I was thinking about St Melan's show.
Yes, that's folded now.
That's folded.
But I understand that was a huge event in its time.
Yes, yes, it was very good.
We had tremendous times with the show.
We used to be on the...
First of all,
St Melan's show was to be at Remney,
on the top of
Remney Hill.
And then it came then to...
Oh, what's there now?
Oh.
The only one, Cud Curnow.
Bakers used to
have the farm.
Oh.
Well, all these...
Oh dear, I can't look at the name.
Oh, that's silly, isn't it?
You know, when you go down now towards Newport,
all these buildings on the right-hand side
and this left-hand side.
Like a radiator plant and stuffer.
That's right, yes. We used to have the show there.
Did you?
And then we came then to Kevin Mappley here, down the bottom of this lane,
where you came over the bridge by the farm park.
We used to have it there.
Oh, really? Yes, in the big field there.
And...
Oh, yes, and then we went then
to Jadika House.
But it was never the same.
Not really. You know, it was to get...
I don't know why it was, because it was a nice site.
But...
We didn't get the agricultural side of things.
Yeah, it changed.
It changed altogether.
So where it was used to be by Coy Curnow...
Yes. What was it...
So where that area is now, it's completely developed, isn't it?
Oh, yes.
Was it just farmland then? It was farmland.
It's hard to imagine.
It is, isn't it?
So before the motorway and everything, it was...
Yes, well, of course they were talking,
they were putting another road up
onto the motorway.
I don't know why that's going to happen, I don't know.
But it was just farmland?
Yes, yes, because it was just a little bit there.
And it was where all the local farmers
would go along there, would they,
to present, show their
livestock? Yes, oh, yes.
And be a proper agriculture show? Oh, yes, it was.
Definitely, everything was there.
And the local show now
is Macken's Show.
And that's always on the first Saturday
of July. And that's a nice little show.
And that's as big as what St. Melans was.
But...
Oh, yes. Oh, yes.
We've had a lot of fun at the shows.
Yeah, lovely.
But things have altered, haven't they, over the years?
Yeah, they do.
I was going to ask you about the lighthouse pub.
Is that something that
locals would have ever used?
Was that something people from out of town would use?
Have you been down to the lighthouse pub?
Yeah. Oh, it was very pleasant.
And a lot of people used to walk
on the bank, you know, across the bank.
Really? Mm-hmm.
Would people walk along from the Cardiff
along here? Yes, well, yes.
From Remney, perhaps, you know, walk.
And then you would see them go back and that, you know.
Oh, yes, yeah.
It was very pleasant on there. It was a nice day.
Yeah, it is. It's nice. You know, it's...
You go up and you can see both sides.
Yeah. I'm sure it was
telling me that...
that people used to
stay in almost
like a chalet, seat shack
in...
by the sea wall.
At St. Brides. At St. Brides?
Yes. Or was it...? They've got caravans
there now. I don't think he meant
the caravan that people would rent out
and would come out for the weekend
and... Maybe he did mean the caravan, actually.
I didn't think he did mean that.
Maybe I got that wrong.
But you said people would come out for the day
on their bikes and...
Oh, a lot of people used to recite
Lotus in Brides. Really? Yes, yes.
Yeah. Yes.
And because they'd had these little tent things,
wouldn't they? Oh, really?
Yes, yes. You'd see those, don't they?
What, like people would camp?
Yes, yes. They'd sleep in there and then...
Really? But along by the wall?
Not so much at all,
but before they put the
caravan sites, because there are
a fair bit of caravan sites at St. Brides
apparently, which I haven't been there for years.
Excuse me. And...
They used to have these
little tent things, you know, you see
it on the television, don't they?
Really? Yes.
Oh, I didn't know that. Yes, it's...
Yes, times have changed, haven't they?
Yeah, they have.
I said, it's one thing I have to ask you about,
because I was asking about it, because part of what
I'm doing is
talking to people who live
along the moors, but that
includes people from the Gypsy community.
Do you remember
any Gypsies coming through?
Well,
when we had ground,
we'd entered ground on the corner down
in St. Brides, and...
...
where the Gypsy Caravan Site is now.
There used to be the old...
She was an old Gypsy in the proper old...
....
Yeah, and they were there for years
on the corner of our field,
and we used to have to just pass them,
you know, to go into the field, and they'd give
no trouble to us, but these are not Gypsies,
are they? Not been unkind,
they'd travel us.
And, I mean...
I mean, they've got horses tethered,
And, well, a friend of mine, she saw this little tiny pony one day and she thought the
pole was in her way.
It's sweet.
She came home and took some hay down to give it on the road.
You know, it's sad.
No, these are travellers, more, I think.
You know, they're not the proper gypsy, I don't think.
There we are.
That's life, I suppose, isn't it?
It is, I suppose.
And there's so many of them now, isn't there?
So do you know, you go towards Cardiff and Rumley from where it lives now.
Yes.
And, I mean, when you first arrived, was that just agricultural land?
Oh yes, all just fields.
It's hard for me to imagine.
Yes, yes, yes.
And, of course, there's the KLG, which is a bit firm opposite, isn't there?
Yeah.
Doing motor things.
But, oh yes, it was all, it's most unfortunate.
I mean, there's a little house there as you go down towards the caravan site, on the right-hand
side, he was the coalman, Mrs Sadler.
And I look at it now and I think to myself, oh, if he came back and saw us, yeah, he'd
be very, very upset about it, you know.
Yeah.
He was the coalman.
Yes.
So he delivered the coal?
He delivered the coal, yes, he had the bags of coal.
Yes.
Mrs Sadler, his son is still alive and he lives in Rumley.
I've seen him for some time, actually.
But as the house was, it was immaculate, you know.
But as it is now, the slates are gone and it's a mess.
It breaks his heart.
Do you remember a nurse, I'm sure it was Nurse Cox, she was the midwife?
Oh yes, yes, yes.
Now, she lived on the top of Pendle Land, didn't she?
That's right.
Well, there were two cottages there and I'm very friendly with Betty Stevens, her name
is now, she was Betty Bridge.
She lived in there, one of those and her brother and those were of course away gone.
Yes, Nurse Cox.
And there was another nurse, she lived up there too, because Nurse Cox moved down to
Castleton.
Yes.
On the left-hand side, as you go down off the main road.
Oh yes, she used to go round delivering the babies.
Yeah, did she deliver Andrew and your daughter?
No, I went into Glossop.
Oh, did you?
Yes, yes, I went to Glossop test.
Yeah.
I just said it with both of them actually.
But, yes, you bring back memories for me as well.
Oh, well I met her...
Well, I suppose we got hedge rows here, where as down there there's the greens.
Ah, yeah.
You know, but not really I suppose, no.
No, the grass is green.
Yeah, yeah.
And you drove a tractor from early on?
Oh yes, yes, yes.
I drove, when we moved from Langorse down to Berry Hill, and Ferguson, Ferguson, 25,
excuse me, I did three journeys from Langorse down to Berry Hill, and took me four and a
half hours.
Really?
With the trailer behind with implements and stuff, brought them down to Berry Hill Farm.
And, and then when I was going back, do you know the way, do you know Pontypool area at
which, you know...
I've been to Pontymoil recently.
Pontymoil?
Yeah.
Oh, right, yeah.
Well, when you go, it wasn't the new road then, because we wouldn't have been able to
go on the new road anyway.
Yeah.
Now, we wouldn't be able to go on the motorway, you know, with the tractor, the same then.
And I used to go down past the horse and jockey on the bottom, and I used to go down the
hill and knock it out of gear, and go down that hill like the crappers.
And I often think, well what if something came across the road?
I wouldn't have the truck.
Oh my goodness.
You do things when you're young, don't you?
Yeah.
Yeah, I did three journeys that.
I brought the plough up and I brought a big trailer up with implements on.
And, yes, it took me four and a half hours.
And were you the only child?
Yes.
I haven't even got a cousin.
Really?
No, but my two aunts didn't marry.
My one aunt did marry, but we didn't have any family.
And then my uncle, he married.
He did.